[TEVA-3406] WIP database outage (#4248)
DFE-Digital/teaching-vacancies: documentation/disaster-recovery.md

> Disaster recovery

Reviewer: Can we add markdown formatting?

> # Disaster recovery

Reviewer 2: We should add this link somewhere: https://docs.cloud.service.gov.uk/deploying_services/postgresql/#restoring-a-postgresql-service-from-a-point-in-time

## Data loss

In the case of a data loss, we need to recover the data as soon as possible in order to resume normal service.
The application's database is a postgres instance, which resides on PaaS. This provides a point-in-time backup with
the resolution of 1 second, available between 5min and 7days ago - this is not applicable to postgres `tiny` plans. We can use
terraform to create a new database using a point-in-time backup of the affacted database instance.

### Make note of database failure time

Make note of the time the database failure occurred, and then use this to calculate when the integrity of the data in the database was still viable. For instance,

> if data loss or corruption happened at 1200hrs, workout what snapshot time is best for the product. This would determine the value of `SNAPSHOT_TIME` env.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
if data loss or corruption happened at 1200hrs, use this to work out what snapshot time is best for the product (consult with the PM if you are unsure what would be best from the product perspective). This would determine the value of `SNAPSHOT_TIME` env.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
___Important___: You should convert the time to UTC before actually using it. When you record the time, note what timezone you are using.
```

### Freeze pipeline

> If not already communicated, no one should merge to master branch

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alert all developers that no one should merge to master branch.
```

### Maintenance mode

> In the instance of data loss, if the application is unavailable, the offline site may be displayed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the instance of data loss, if the application is unavailable, the CDN may be forwarding requests to the [offline site](/documentation/offline-site.md).
```

> If the application is still available and there is a risk of users adding data, enable the maintenace mode, by setting [Maintenance mode](maintenance-mode.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the application is still available and there is a risk of users adding data, [enable the maintenace mode](maintenance-mode.md).
```

> ### Get postgres database ID

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Get bad postgres database ID
```

Author: not sure I follow.... "bad"

> Use the makefile's `get-postgres-instance-guid` to get the database guid, use the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the makefile's `get-postgres-instance-guid` to get the database guid, use the following command (set `CONFIRM_PRODUCTION` to `true`):
```

Author: not sure I follow....?

Reviewer 2: I don't want people to copy and paste this command during a simulation exercise, and accidentally blow up production. They should write `true` themselves.

> Use the makefile's `get-postgres-instance-guid` to get the database guid, use the following command -

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the makefile's `get-postgres-instance-guid` to get the database guid, using the following command, where the passcode is a [GOV.UK PaaS one-time passcode](https://login.london.cloud.service.gov.uk/passcode):
```

```

> make production get-postgres-instance-guid passcode=xxxx CONFIRM_PRODUCTION=true

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
make production get-postgres-instance-guid passcode=xxxx CONFIRM_PRODUCTION=xxxx
```

Author: not sure I follow...?

Reviewer 2: I don't want people to copy and paste this command during a simulation exercise, and accidentally blow up production. They should write `true` themselves.

```

> ### Rename postgres databas instance service

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Rename bad postgres database instance service
```

> Part of the remediation process is to rename the affected database instance so it can be recreated with the production name. There is a makefile target (rename-postgres-service)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Rename the affected database instance so a new database can be recreated with the production name. There is a makefile target
```

> to achieve this -

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

```

> make production rename-postgres-service passcode=xxxx CONFIRM_PRODUCTION=true

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
make production rename-postgres-service passcode=xxxx CONFIRM_PRODUCTION=xxxx
```

```

> this renames the database by adding the "-old" to the database name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

This renames the database by appending "-old" to the database name.
```

> ### Remove postgres database instance from terraform state file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Remove bad postgres database instance from terraform state file
```

> In order for terraform to be able to create a new database instance, the existing database reference needs to be removed from the state file. This is to ensure it is no longer managed by terraform. To achieve this, use the makefile target -

Reviewer 2: I could use a little further explanation of what effect we achieve when we

> ensure it is no longer managed by terraform

Reviewer 2: It ‘tricks terraform into thinking the database no longer exists so that it creates a new one’ (correct?)

Reviewer 2: I mean I don't know exactly how not letting terraform manage a resource helps - so we should explain that here.

```
make production remove-postgres-tf-state CONFIRM_PRODUCTION=true
```

> 

Reviewer 2: From the hackmd:

> before the app is recovered, please check the current docker tag used in the affected environment. ie cf app teaching-vacancies-qa | grep "docker image" the tag is after the : i.e ghcr.io/dfe-digital/teaching-vacancies:master-7b736906654cbd42145420ad40fcbc6ec257bd1c

### Restore postgres database instance

> The following variables need to be set: `get-postgres-instance-guid`, `DB_INSTANCE_GUID` and `SNAPSHOT_TIME` ("2021-09-14 16:00:00" IMPORTANT - this is UTC time!), `passcode=xxxxx` `CONFIRM_PRODUCTION=true`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following variables need to be set: `DB_INSTANCE_GUID` (the output of [the 'Get bad postgres instance guid' step](#get-bad-postgres-database-id), `SNAPSHOT_TIME` ("2021-09-14 16:00:00" IMPORTANT - this is UTC time!), `passcode` (a [GOV.UK PaaS one-time passcode](https://login.london.cloud.service.gov.uk/passcode)), `CONFIRM_PRODUCTION` (true)
```

>  Use the following makefile command to initiate the restore process -

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the variables changed, use the following makefile command to initiate the restore process:
```

 ```

>  make production restore-postgres DB_INSTANCE_GUID=abcdb262-79d1-xx1x-b1dc-0534fb9b4 SNAPSHOT_TIME="2021-11-16 15:20:00" passcode=xxxxx CONFIRM_PRODUCTION=true

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 make production restore-postgres DB_INSTANCE_GUID=abcdb262-79d1-xx1x-b1dc-0534fb9b4 SNAPSHOT_TIME="2021-11-16 15:20:00" passcode=xxxxx CONFIRM_PRODUCTION=xxxx
```

Author: not sure i follow..?

 ```

>  this will create a new database instance but with a point-in-time database backup of affected database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TODO: Add the length of time this command takes to run. (Does it depend on the size of the database?)
```

Author: not sure this is required, the length of time is a moving target....?

Reviewer 2: Then why were we trying to measure it?

If the application is still available and there is a risk of users adding data, enable [Maintenance mode](maintenance-mode.md).

### Get affected postgres database ID

Use the makefile's `get-postgres-instance-guid` to get the database guid, use the following command:

```
make production get-postgres-instance-guid passcode=xxxx CONFIRM_PRODUCTION=true
```

### Rename postgres database instance service

Rename the affected database instance so a new database can be recreated with the production name. To achieve this, run the following make command

```
make production rename-postgres-service passcode=xxxx CONFIRM_PRODUCTION=true
```
this renames the database by appending "-old" to the database name.

### Remove affected postgres database instance from terraform state file

In order for terraform to be able to create a new database instance, the existing database reference needs to be removed from the state file. This is to ensure it is no longer managed by terraform. To achieve this, use the makefile target -

```
make production remove-postgres-tf-state CONFIRM_PRODUCTION=true
```

### Restore postgres database instance

> The following variables need to be set: `DB_INSTANCE_GUID` (the output of [the 'Get bad postgres instance guid' step](#get-bad-postgres-database-id), `SNAPSHOT_TIME` ("2021-09-14 16:00:00" IMPORTANT - this is UTC time!), `passcode` (a [GOV.UK PaaS one-time passcode](https://login.london.cloud.service.gov.uk/passcode)), `CONFIRM_PRODUCTION` (true) and `tag` (cf app teaching-vacancies-qa | grep "docker image" the tag is after the : i.e ghcr.io/dfe-digital/teaching-vacancies:master-7b736906654cbd42145420ad40fcbc6ec257bd1c)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following variables need to be set: `DB_INSTANCE_GUID` (the output of [the 'Get affected postgres instance guid' step](#get-affected-postgres-database-id), `SNAPSHOT_TIME` ("2021-09-14 16:00:00" IMPORTANT - this is UTC time!), `passcode` (a [GOV.UK PaaS one-time passcode](https://login.london.cloud.service.gov.uk/passcode)), `CONFIRM_PRODUCTION` (true) and `tag` (cf app teaching-vacancies-qa | grep "docker image" the tag is after the : i.e ghcr.io/dfe-digital/teaching-vacancies:master-7b736906654cbd42145420ad40fcbc6ec257bd1c)
```
